---
layout: default
title:  VI. DISCOVERY PROCEDURES FOR BANKING TRANSACTIONS
parent: § Blockchain and Its Potential Real-World Applications-Implications on Disco on Discovery Procedures 
grand_parent: B
nav_order: 60 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## VI. DISCOVERY PROCEDURES FOR BANKING TRANSACTIONS
In 1976, the Supreme Court decided United States v. Miller, primarily holding that individuals have no legitimate “expectation of privacy” with respect to banking records.<sup>127</sup> The Court reasoned that by utilizing banking systems, “the depositor takes the risk, in revealing his affairs to another, that the information will be conveyed by that person to the Government.”<sup>128</sup> This holding affirmed the ability of banking records to be subpoenaed and subject to traditional discovery by adversarial parties in a proceeding.<sup>129</sup>

While *Miller* directly dealt with criminal proceedings and 

***
{: .fs-2}
<sup>127</sup>. United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976). 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>128</sup>. *Id*. at 443 (citing United States v. White, 401 U.S. 745, 751–52 (1971)). 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>129</sup>. *Id*. at 444.
{: .fs-2}
***

Fourth Amendment concerns,<sup>130</sup> the Federal Rules of Evidence do not exempt banking records as privileged.<sup>131</sup> Analogously, when a user engages in a transaction via blockchain, they similarly “reveal their affairs” to a third party, bringing the information within the scope of traditional discovery and subpoena procedures.<sup>132</sup> While such information, which has been transacted through a third party, can be used as evidence at trial, the party moving for entrance of the evidence must still lay a foundation for its admissibility.<sup>133</sup>

Generally, this requires a representative from the bank to determine that the record sought to be entered is authentic and falls within the purview of the business records exception to hearsay.<sup>134</sup> The necessity for this exists because chain of custody issues are abound when dealing with a bank that has humans who maintain the systems and compile reports.<sup>135</sup> This problem could be avoided by using blockchain technologies, which automatically report transactions to the public by their blockchain explorer sites.

Insofar as admissibility is concerned, blockchain has not reached a point where the general population is aware of the immutability that is inherent in blockchain systems. As such, admission of blockchain explorer sources may be challenged on an authentication basis. Today, authentication of Electronically Stored Information (“ESI”) is covered in the Federal Rules of Evidence (“FRE”).<sup>136</sup> In December of 2017, Rule 902 of the FRE, which governs the admissibility of “Evidence that is SelfAuthenticating,” was amended to add two new subsections: 13 and 14.<sup>137</sup> Rule 902(13) allows for the admissibility of “Certified Records Generated by an Electronic Process or System.”<sup>138</sup> The rule allows the admission of “record[s] generated by an electronic process or system that produces an accurate result, as shown by

***
<sup>130</sup>. U.S. CONST. amend. IV.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>131</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 803(6).
{: .fs-2}
<sup>132</sup>. United States v. Gratkowski, 964 F.3d 307 (5th Cir. 2020).
{: .fs-2}
<sup>133</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 901.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>134</sup>. *Id*.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>135</sup>. Charles A. Wright & Arthur R. Miller, *Foundations and Confrontations: Certifications and Custodial Witnesses, in* 30 FED. PRAC. & PROC. EVID. § 6637 (2d ed. 2021).
{: .fs-2}
<sup>136</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 902(13)-(14).
{: .fs-2}
<sup>137</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 902.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>138</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 902(13).
{: .fs-2}
***

*certification of a qualified person* . . . [also subject to] the notice requirements of Rule 902(11).”<sup>139</sup> Rule 902(14) allows copies of such data to be admitted as long as the underlying process which creates the copy is similarly certified by a qualified person.<sup>140</sup>

The amendment is intended to simplify procedures by allowing certification to be made by affidavit rather than lengthy testimony. Without this amendment, if one sought to introduce evidence which was pulled from a blockchain ledger, the party seeking admission would be obligated to produce an expert who could succinctly explain to the judge and jury how the inherent structure of blockchain processes secure and verify both the transaction and the “exploring” of that transaction.<sup>141</sup> The expert would have to explain that there is no third party who must “vouch” for the validity of the information because the system itself creates logs by such processes.<sup>142</sup> After all, blockchain information is merely electronically stored information, but what makes it different is how the stored information is secured and how the public has the ability to write new information and view the information without having the ability to alter any information previously written.<sup>143</sup>

While blockchain technology is still in its infancy, this process of hiring an expert to certify the process to lay a foundation for the admissibility of the information contained on the blockchain is necessary. However, there may come a time where the technology itself, or individual blockchains, will become so pervasive as to allow the court to merely take judicial notice of the authenticity of the information on the blockchain.

As it stands now, courts are versed in procedures that allow for certain electronically stored information to be produced in admissible form through “eDiscovery Software.”<sup>144</sup> These programs, however, are numerous, and each individual program which produces, collects, or reports ESI, will require certification by an expert who is versed on the processes of each individual

***
<sup>139</sup>. *Id*. (emphasis added). 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>140</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 902(14). 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>141</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 803(6). 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>142</sup>. *Id*. 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>143</sup>. *See* Discussion, *supra* Part III. 
{: .fs-2}
<sup>144</sup>. *See* DEP’T JUST. & ADMIN. OFF. U.S. CTS., RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ELECTRONICALLY STORED INFORMATION (ESI) DISCOVERY PRODUCTION IN FEDERAL CRIMINAL CASES (Feb. 2012), https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/finalesiprotocolbookmarked.pdf.
{: .fs-2}
***

program being used.<sup>145</sup> The sheer volume of programs and the quickly evolving landscape surrounding the ESI sector do not currently provide enough specificity for a judge to take judicial notice of the processes of all the programs. The programs differ enough in their processes to require that an expert certify why this program should be trusted to do what it does. If an adversary wishes to oppose admission of the evidence, they will be obligated to present an expert witness to testify to the underlying technical information regarding the processes which report the information.<sup>146</sup>

Individual blockchains, however, are different from the numerous programs that a digital forensic investigator might use in their suite of programs to get ESI to the judge and jury. Throughout the years, programs come and go, processes are changed or updated, and there may always be a different way these programs function, requiring continual authentication of the processes which lead to the production of ESI evidence.<sup>147</sup> There may come a time, however, where certain blockchains, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, become so ubiquitous that certification of the processes becomes unnecessary due to its pervasiveness. At some point in the future, the phrase “Bitcoin transaction (or whichever blockchain is predominant at the time) and exploring is secured and verified” may become as common as the old standard “the sky is blue.” How likely is that? Time will tell, but if every sci-fi movie ever created is to be believed, the future will be a strange place where today’s cutting-edge technology is as taken for granted as the color of the sky.<sup>148</sup> Once we get there, will facts that exist on the blockchain be subject to the concept of judicial notice?

***
<sup>145</sup>. FED. R. EVID. 902 (advisory committee notes to 2017 Amendments).
{: .fs-2}
<sup>146</sup>. *Id*.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>147</sup>. Bill Crane, *Digital Forensics: A Decade of Changes*, POLICE (Nov. 11, 2013), https://www.policemag.com/374406/digital-forensics-a-decade-ofchanges.
{: .fs-2}
<sup>148</sup>. *See generally* BACK TO THE FUTURE PART II (Universal Pictures 1989).
{: .fs-2}
***

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-1/">
I. THE BIRTH OF BITCOIN: BLOCKCHAIN ORIGINS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-2/">
II. BLOCKCHAIN ILLUSTRATION</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-3/">
III. HOW BLOCKCHAIN WORKS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-4/">
IV. PUBLIC, PRIVATE, AND PERMISSIONED BLOCKCHAINS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-5/">
V. ALTERNATE USES FOR BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY </a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-6/">
VI. DISCOVERY PROCEDURES FOR BANKING TRANSACTIONS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-7/">
VII. JUDICIAL NOTICE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-8/">
VIII. PUBLIC POLICY OF COST SAVING</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/B/Blockchain-and-Its-Potential-Real-World-Applications-Implications-on-Disco-on-Discovery-Procedures-9/">
IX. CONCLUSION</a></li></ul>
***

</div>
